Thank you, friends. Thank you. Warm greetings. Welcome. Warm-hearted welcome. Greetings. Thanks
for joining. Here we are again, another session of Dudjom Tersar Ngondro practice. We'll begin,
as usual, with like a short time to reflect or contemplate on the teachings, the Dharma.
So there's always these three ways we poise our mind and open our heart that we've been
taught by all the lineage masters, including our own, precious, root gurus, lineage masters,
Ven. Kenshin, Palanciya, Rinpoche, Ven. Khenpo Tsewang Dongya Rinpoche, and these three points
are have joy and appreciation, or refuge, this renunciation mind. And secondly, Bodhichi
Ta. Genuine heartfelt wish for all beings to be free of suffering and the cause of suffering,
and I personally will become enlightened to bring this about, to make this happen. Then
pure perception, kind of relaxing confidently, kind of allowing the kind of natural intelligence
and brightness and spaciousness of our own hearts and minds to just be as they are, natural,
bright, clear, and call this divine or pure, to let our body's speech and mind rest, relax
naturally, say purely. So to kind of just confidently be in pure body, pure speech,
pure mind, that's deity, mantra, Dharmakaya, and that everything we experience around us
is mandala. It's like an enlightened world. So with this joy and appreciation, or gratitude,
bodhicitta, and pure perception, we become receptive to the Dharma. We all do that together
together. Thanks so much. So as usual, there's kind of like a theme to kind of contemplate
around. And then this week, the theme is pulling the rug out from under oneself, pulling the
rug out from under oneself. That's today's theme. And so I thought today I was thinking
this morning is kind of fitting. It's about to be New Year, just what a couple days. So
often a good part or practice of New Year, of like allowing space for fresh blooms to
come out is a little bit clean out the cobwebs, clean house a little bit. So pulling out the
rug from under oneself. So this is a theme that's like very strong, and I think very
direct. And as a good Dharma practice, it's actually about one's own mind, my mind and
how my mind gets locked into extreme views. So this time is going to be a little bit of
a survey of all the ways my mind locks itself into extreme views. And I need to pull the
rug out from under that. I need to kind of dismantle this fixation, need to relax this
tight grasping egoic, what is it called? Cunning self-important ego ghost. And Kimbo-san and
Don Nurembuche's prayer to his Holiness Dujurembuche, which we read together as Sangha across the
world in different pockets, this poem to his Holiness Dujurembuche is a strong line. May
we really mingle our minds and become like these great masters, these really noble ones,
and to do so we really have to release our grasping. It's the path. So we have to release
grasping onto eternalism and nihilism, holding too tightly onto something, pushing everything
else away too strongly. Acceptance, rejection, constantly distorting what's natural, the
natural flow. Instead, we're locking, freezing, fixating, grasping. So we're the only ones
that can really release this. We have to learn to, what does it say, be the master of our
own minds, be our own teacher, to pull the rug out from under ourselves. This is kind
of what this path is leading us to, so we can actually stand up confidently on our own
two feet. And so to begin, I thought the natural place for me to begin was to actually read
something from Ken Rinpoche, Ken Chipoloshe Rinpoche, and it was a quick little story
that's online on PBC, Padmasavava.org. There's personal stories about Ken Rinpoche's and my
brother Andrew, he related a story, and I'll just read it short. He called it, "Look to
your own mind." And this is Andrew. "One day I was walking with Ken Shin Rinpoche up the
driveway at PSL during a month-long retreat. Rinpoche's had been giving the most profound
heart essence teachings of the clear light great perfection for several weeks. After
some time I asked him, 'What makes us qualified to receive these profound and secret teachings?'
And he told me that we'd come from all around with a sincere interest and curiosity and
learning and practicing the dharma. And that was enough for him. Then I mentioned to Rinpoche
how it seemed like some of us treated the teachings so casually, leaving precious Zogchen
books next to the shoe rack and garbage can with a little mindfulness. Ken Shin Rinpoche
stopped and looked at me in the eyes, and he spread his arms out as wide as he could,
and he said, 'The view of Zogchen is like this, as vast as the sky, so big. When you start
looking at the faults of others, oh, they're doing this wrong, that wrong, your view gets
smaller and smaller.' And he moved his arms closer until his hands were right next to
the side of his head, like a horse with blinders on. That's not Zogchen. That's not even Buddhism.
In Buddhism we look to our own mind all the time. That's the practice, and that's what
we should do. And Andrew said, 'I never forgot that.' So I thought to emphasize that at front
because this is a little bit of a direct, I'm going to say some direct things. So this is
really strong, these strong teachings. Dharma can be very clear reflections sometimes, especially
when we're pointing out extreme views. And the pointing is going back to me. How am I
doing this? Because that's the only thing I can really do anything about. My mind, my
heart, my motivation. At the same time, I also think some degree for myself, and it's like
I have to say something now, need to actually kind of like dust this off a little bit. Now
in the kind of AI information explosion age, it's so easy to be clever about Dharma. It's
so easy to sound Dharma smart. It's still very difficult to really absorb the teachings
and let them change you. So when it's a time that's so easy to repeat these profound instructions,
we need to freshen this up. We really need to freshen this up. So part of my New Year's
resolution is I should want to reread a book that was really impactful for me called Poison
is Medicine, Clarifying the Vajrayana. This is a free PDF download book, e-book, by Zong
Sart Ken Sidermache. Poison is Medicine, Clarifying the Vajrayana. My resolution is to reread
this book this year. So I think I can do this resolution. It's really kind of short 200
pages. It's so very readable. I'm going to start with some quotes from there to freshen
the context, pulling the rug out from underneath oneself. Page 173. Only those of you who have
genuinely set your hearts on learning how to transform how you think should even consider
setting foot on the tantric path. We really have to be willing to change. Another quote.
Same book, page X. This is right at the beginning. Zong Sart Ken Sidermache. The Vajrayana is
the best thing that ever happened on this planet. Not only does it train us to think
outside of Samsara's box, it shows us how to be inside and outside the box at the same
time. And although the tumultuous ocean of jealousy, anger, pride, doubt, greed and delusion
that fills our minds can feel extremely daunting, the Vajrayana tells us it needn't be. The
antidote to all that poison is not outside us but within. We already have exactly the
right dose. Not a single drop is missing. Nothing needs improving. Upgrading, customizing or
adapting. Our innate wisdom is the antidote we seek. It is perfectly intact and available
for immediate use as it always has been. Is this idea too hard for you to chew? If it
isn't, why not have a go at tracking down your own innate wisdom? How? By following wisdom's
footprints which are your emotions. The essence of the Vajrayana's message is that poison
is medicine just as it is with nothing added and nothing taken away. I hope and pray that
none of you ever lose your enthusiasm for and curiosity about this glorious, brilliant,
incomparable path. How fortunate we are. There's so many juicy quotes from this book. One more.
Message 233. By changing just one word of the Buddha Dharma, by changing just one word,
you effectively take on full responsibility for the spiritual path and enlightenment of
all future practitioners. I, for one, lack the courage to do such a thing. So we're talking
about lineage teachings here. And this is all around a similar topic that's been debated
in Buddhism for centuries. What's the essence? What's the expression? What's provisional?
What's definitive? And so all inquiry into extreme views is trying to ascertain the difference
between these two. What is definitive? What is provisional? What can be adapted? What
is unchanging? This is a very deep topic in Buddhism and all these Buddhist philosophical
schools debate this topic. And we can look at this in fresh ways, which I think is kind
of needed in some ways. And we just have to be doing adaptive things and not break anything
essential. But some basic secular, simple frameworks for boxing up in a really simple way. Some
extreme views is looking at these few boxes. Pre-modern extreme views, modern extreme views,
post-modern extreme views, post-modern extreme views. This is not in Buddhism. These words
aren't in Buddhism. Similar to the Buddha didn't teach in English. There's a lot of
different communication things we're using now. The Buddha did not use English, internet,
these nations. There's so many filtering systems we're using that weren't talked about.
So here's an additional one that's really simple and it totally fits with teachings.
So pre-modern extreme thinking. What are pre-modern extreme views we need to kind of dust off
and open up and relax our grasping mind around? This is just some. It's like a grab bag list
that I came up with just really quickly, actually. Pre-modern extreme views. These are all the
ways that we are literalists, fundamentalists. My path is the only path. My teacher is the
best. My outfit is the right one. My sangha is the best. All the outer features. We think
this is the essence. Tibetan language is the best. Sanskrit is the best. This is just fundamental
ism.
We can value the ways things are expressed and not become a fundamentalist just because
we like hamburgers doesn't mean they're the best. Just because Buddhism works for me doesn't
mean it works for everyone. Just because a certain teaching in Buddhism works for me
today it might not really help me tomorrow. This is a constant shifting dynamic. This
mind of mine. And this shifting mind of mine, what it's scared of doing is it's basically
losing control. What it does is it grabs on and tries to stop the movement, the change.
The most obvious way we do this is with literal stuff like clothing, colors, sounds, shapes,
the obvious, tangible, sensorial stuff. This is all extreme view. This goes really deep.
This is just the very easy stuff to recognize. This is extreme. Anytime we're in a mode where
my religion is the best and then we say, oh, there's bad things about others, that breaks
the sixth root downfall in Vajrayana. Oh, my way is the best. My practice is the best.
Your practice, eh, I tried that for a while. It wasn't so good. That breaks the third root
downfall. This kind of fundamentalism the Buddha taught very clearly. Don't look at the teacher.
Look at the teaching. Don't be in celebrity obsession mindset. What's the teaching? What's
the dharma? Don't obsess with the doctor. Actually carefully consider the medicine.
This is so straight up bedrock Buddhism. This whole set of extreme views is really something
to look at, especially as dharma goes into other countries, other times, other languages,
other configurations. There can be a lot of mistakes made with this. Mis-asserting, what's
the expression and what's the essence? That's what all of these extreme views have to be
really careful. What needs to be preserved? What can be adapted? I think that's why we
have lineage, ongoing systems of checks and balances of actually trying these things out
over long periods of time and not just recklessly, quickly changing things up either. We're not
just innovating all these wonderful, valuable things out of existence so quickly. We're
trying to preserve the root value, the essence of Buddhism without changing a single word.
But it has to be able to zing, like clearly, crisply ring in people with genuine interest,
and that's on the skillful means of the practitioner. For my own mind, how do I skillfully make
the teaching come alive in my own mind? To some degree, I really need to get out of this
mindset of my way, my teaching, my this, my that, is the only way, the best way, or insert
some other rigid, reifying, calcifying grasping that says my way is the best way, every other
way is not as good. I'm right, you're wrong. This is standard black and white binary thinking
is so obviously not nearly 21st century anymore. I think this is very self-evident at this
point. Hyperpolarization, maybe it's not that evident to a lot of people, but for Buddhists,
this should be really obvious. So that's the general bucket of pre-modern literal fundamentalism.
I can go into this really with a lot of detail, but our time is really short. There's the
good versions of pre-modern things, and we'll get to this at the end quickly. There's the
extreme ways of doing these things. There's the healthy balanced ways of doing these things.
So then going through the extremes first, the fixation, what needs to be kind of freshened
up. Oh, extreme modernism. How am I an extreme modernist? If I say the teaching has to be
logical, has to be rational, has to make sense. Where's the data? I want to see the statistics.
It has to fit in my box, right? This is a little more subtle because my box now is not just
the way I look, but it's how I think my system of logic, my sense making, my internal box.
So it's not the outer features, the house I'm in, the landscape. It's how my mind functions.
So we'll get to the view here in a minute. This is all really kind of pointing towards
the view. But so what are the ways that I can fixate on my logic? Is it has to be linear?
Same way, has to be non-linear. Does it have to be human centric? Has to be non-human centric.
These are big pattern boxes we fit everything into. How can I not as human? Well, the great
Bumi Bodhisattvas, they don't do that. They've given up. That's why they emanate in other
bodies in other realms. If you go to the Raksha realm, the Naga realm, they don't look like
a human there. They look like a Naga. It's not human centric. They're reflecting what's
actually helpful for the beings that they're in contact with. This is really flexible to
how can we do this? What's like learning language is a very good example. If you're speaking
with someone who only speaks French, if you don't know French, the limit of your capacity
to communicate, to connect with them, to actually share intimate experience, to tell jokes and
laugh at the same time is severely limited. It's up to you as Bodhisattva to learn French,
to learn what it's like to be a squirrel, to consider what it might be like to be a Naga.
What is it like for other humans that aren't in my shoes? This is standard Bodhisattva stuff.
What's the world like in someone else's shoes? Not just how do I treat them the way I want
to be treated. I treat them the way they want to be treated. This is a Bodhisattva approach.
If we demand, "Everything fits into my logic, my sense making, my way of doing this." This
is just modernism, hyper rationalism, has to make sense. It always means my sense making.
There are a lot of different sense making. We can look at that. That's when we get into
postmodern. Postmodern says, "What are you talking about? Which lens are you talking
about? Which frame?" Male frame, female frame, non-binary frame, old frame, English frame,
indigenous frame, Tibetan frame, Indian frame, squirrel frame, animal frame. Which way? Because
if we assume there's one frame everyone else has to fit in, that's called hegemony, right?
I mean, it's just empire. This is a classic colonial move. This is a no-no. Everyone knows
this now. You can't just go into some foreign country and just change everything the way
you want it, even though we do this. I just recently did it. It's called tourism. This
is a problem with extreme kind of thing that opens up in postmodernism, hypermobility.
If I have the ability, the luxury, the advantage to move into different situations, places
on the earth, different fields of exploration, different ideas, different cultures, different
online communities, am I playing according to the terms that are established in the community
or in the culture or in the ecology? Or am I just coming in and I'm going to tell you
my story, my feelings, my truth, my opinion? Because that breaks living ecology. You go
somewhere as a tourist and you make everything have to fit according to your opinion, that's
literally colonialism in the name of postmodernism. It's really funny. And my mind does this as
we move between different situations more and more as the Dharma is doing now. How does
the Dharma go into a new culture and not break the culture, but be shaped by the culture
but shaped in ways that don't break the fundamental essence of the Buddha Dharma by even one word?
This is the same inquiry of provisional verse definitive. So how do we not break living
ecology? How do we actually respect a place when we arrive into it? How do we show up
and listen instead of show up and yell? I mean, how do we establish good faith dynamics
in a conversation? These are all so relevant. And for bodhisattvas, this has to be the impulse
of bodhisattvas. It has to be. They said so many times, Buddhism never forced anything
on anyone. He just saw what is available to be helped, to be nourished, what's the readiness
of others, their disposition, their readiness. And then what's my capability? What's the
communication? What's the shared experience to kind of work within? And then the Buddha
reflected that. This is so deeply, this is called being a custodial species, as Tyson
Yom Kippur says. We go to a place and mutually benefit. This is the way of the bodhisattva.
It's not going to a place and just pushing my thing. One way to go to a place and push
my thing is demand everything to not make sense. This is so tricky mind. The hyper extreme
modernist says everything has to be rational. Extreme postmodern, everything has to be non-rational
.
And this is totally against Buddhism, definitely against Nyingma Buddhism. They always say
it's a union of study and practice. Another way you can say that is merit and wisdom.
Another way you can say that is positive grasping and non-grasping. Another way you can say
that is like helpful concepts called study and contemplation and going beyond concepts.
That's called wisdom of meditative insight. Always both. We have to include both the rational
or any way of any sense making, a coherent pattern system of knowledge. In addition,
we have to go beyond all patterned ways of making sense because we have to become flexibly
able to move between them without breaking them. So if you play tennis, I play tennis.
You play basketball, I play basketball. You speak English, I speak English or Spanish
or French or computer programming of many different kinds of computer programming languages.
Bodhisattvas can flexibly move between games. We often think of it as dreams. That's why
they're so skillful. How could they do that? Because they have the prajna, the wisdom,
the non-conceptual insight to actually see it's just a game. It's just a dream. This
is just an apparition. It's mere appearance. So they don't get caught with the result of
the dream of the game. So then they can give the victory to others, make it a good dream
for someone else. But you have to know how to play the game you're in to do that effectively
to support someone else. You have to actually vibe with the living local ecology. And then
this goes into also extreme view of post-postmodernism. Knowing how a game works, knowing how an
ecology functions, knowing how a company runs, knowing how the history of Buddhism is very
different than letting the dharma affect you. Just using clever dharma words, studying dharma,
study, study, study, this one is Deuterim but she said this in Mountain Retreat Instructions.
If you become an expert scholar of Buddhism but you don't ever apply the teachings in
your life, it won't really help much. When you die, you'll have been able to say many
things but it didn't really change you. It didn't really make you of much benefit to
other beings. It's so valuable to have dharma books around even if you never read them.
But it's so much more valuable to actually read them, try to absorb the meaning. So you
become one with the dharma. You let it change you. And that means we can't always hold things
at a distance and that's something we get really good at. Once we go beyond extremism
of postmodernism, we start to be able to get a very encompassing bird's eye view. We start
to see a lot of big patterns. We start to connect a lot of dots between different systems.
Between different Buddhist schools, for example. What's the perfect example of this capacity
turning on? The nine yana system. It's a meta framework. It's a meta system. How do all
the yanas fit together? How do all the Buddhist philosophies fit together? How does one philosophy
like Babaśika go into the next one like Śrījāntaka go into the next one like mind only and then
madhyamaka, then tantra, then zogchen. That's a meta theory. It's a meta theoretical framework.
This is a function of healthy post postmodernism. It links up different systems into larger
coherent holes. This is straight up bread and butter Buddhism. This is like essential
ningmo Buddhism. Otherwise, if you don't agree to that, you don't have nine yanas. You just
have a Buddhist monolith, one yana. This is an extreme approach. Some people really take
that approach. One yana is called zogchen. There's only a single sphere of dharmadhātū
or something like that. Don't need all these other techniques, concepts, rules, practices,
nundras and all this stuff. Because I have this single sphere of dharmadhātū, I just
need one yana. The great master, Vimalamitra, said he would be reborn every hundred years
to correct exactly that mistake. As if zogchen is mere emptiness. It's not. So a very simple
direct way to say this that can be unpacked a lot is zogchen does not equal zen. The ninth
yana is not the same as the third yana. It's obvious when you put it in a nine yana framework.
What's the big difference between zogchen and zen? That's a genuine question. This is the
question that Vimalamitra comes back every hundred years to clarify. This is what Nyingma
Buddhism has said in a long time. What's the difference between the third yana and the
ninth yana? It's called the tantras. What is the primary difference between the third
yana, bodhisattva yana, which includes wrongtong and shentong? Emptiness of self, emptiness
of other, emptiness of self-fixation, emptiness of all the adventitious things clogging up
our Buddha nature. What happens after that? Pure body starts coming out. We start to see
pure body. Pure speech starts coming out. We start to see pure speech. That's called
deity and mantra, otherwise known as tantra, because zen establishes pure mind just like
in zogchen. That's what the great Madhyamaka middleweight teachings say. Pure mind is the
same in third yana and the ninth yana. It's emptiness, great emptiness, but zogchen is
not just emptiness. It's a union of relative and absolute, just like great Madhyamaka is
too, union of relative and absolute. Except the difference in great Madhyamaka, it's not
pure relative yet. The tantras includes all the pure relative, all the way up to zogchen,
and that's the big difference. It's quite different, impure body and pure body, impure
speech and impure speech. Impure mind, sam, is like duality mind, monkey mind, and rigpa,
wisdom mind, jhana. It's very different. Zen has pure mind, zogchen has pure mind. What's
the difference? Great purity. It's called pure speech and pure body. That's the rubakaya,
not just dharmakaya. That's why the Buddha taught all these tekpas, paths, yanas. I was
just happy to have the tremendously great fortune to be in Mexico, received teachings
from Zog's Art Cancer which is so astounding. He said, "If you do zogchen, you can't leave
out a single tekpa, not a single yana, not a single path, not a single way of communicating
with beings. Can it be the great completion if you leave out a single path?" It's not
just the ninth path. It includes the eighth path, seventh, sixth, fifth, fourth, third,
second, first. It includes everything, great completion. Venerable Ken Burmice, he said
this, "Zogchen is like a dollar. All the yanas are like the coins that make up the dollar."
That's why it's a great completion. It includes them all. It's not just the outermost ring
or the single sphere. It's a single sphere that includes it all, all the other yanas,
including Zen. It's the beating heart. It's bodhicitta, including renunciation mind, refuge.
That's called foundational Buddhism. It has to be included. These are like really core
teachings. That mistake has to also be corrected, not just hovering high in the sky saying big
lofty rainbow-mouthed words, actually being on the ground in living experience, which
means you have to see what's my mind doing now, what's actually a skillful way to deal
with it, who's around, what's available, how do I sync up with things in healthy living
lineage ways that actually honor the ecology of the lived what is happening right now in
real time. That's called lineage Nyayana Buddhism, not just high-level emptiness only talk, which
in one simple way is just called anti-intellectualism. All these concepts, they get in the way of
Rigpa, right? But for the Buddha, they didn't get in the way of his Rigpa at all. He was
able to speak, walk, talk, chew gum. Wisdom includes all the other techpas, yanas, approaches,
skillful means. It's not just the emptiness ones because that's a whole thing in middle
way. I'm kind of complaining. I'm not really complaining. These are actually serious things
that are mistakes happening in dharma, like they're mistakes, extreme views we can hold.
If you really get into middle way Madhyamaka, you don't prefer absolute over relative. That's
like saying I'm a middle way person and I prefer nirvana over samsara. This is the exact
thing that's being corrected in the middle way. Absolute and relative are the union.
If you actually go beyond all conceptual designation, you can't even say there's liberation because
there was never imprisonment. What do you mean nirvana? There is no such thing as samsara.
What do you mean many? There's not even one. If we really go beyond conceptual designation
and we have this kind of wisdom as a stable abiding experience, then we'll include every
single other dream of every single other being. If we just talk this way and we don't viscerally
actually experience the utter flexibility or the emptiness, the openness, the fullness
of awareness when it's really not locking up and fixating, we're just talking about
it being free, but it's so clogged up in there. This is just dream talk. It doesn't help at
all. It just makes you seem kind of like, you know, when you use your usual jerk habits,
but you say nice, sweet, emptiness, spacious things. It makes people want to run away from
the dharma. Oh, look at this non-dual guy. It's almost always a white guy. It's almost
always a guy. And they talk big emptiness things. Oh, big anti-intellectual things, which is
empty. Don't get so caught up in all these concepts, man. Just be here now, right? And
then they very conveniently don't forget concepts like, you know, where's my salary? Where do
we go for vacation? These are all concepts in middle way, all this of concepts. If we
think we're trying to get somewhere for enlightenment, that's a concept. We're like, we're only
want to hear nice words about ourselves. That's a concept. I mean, there's no even outside
out there in middle way. This is all sutra. There's not even an outside. What are you
even talking about? How's there even an inside? There's all these concepts. If we're really
abiding in that way, you know what we'll be like with people. We'll be so tender. Because
all these games and dreams and nightmares we're all creating for ourselves is so preventable.
It's just such an excruciating like, see, did you see it in these master's eyes? They see
all this suffering beings go through and how they're doing all of it to themselves. It's
a complete self created mistake. There's no such thing as suffering for these noble ones.
They have such tender hearted bodhicitta kindness. And that's actually why they can be really
clear too. Because when we start doing really disruptive things for ourselves, to each other,
to the planet, to all these other species, like to some degree, the bodhisattva also
has to say, no, you can't just go around and murder people. And you have to go, I'm putting
you in prison. Okay, it's there is no prison. There's no freedom because there's no imprisonment
and all that. But you're going to jail. There are such things as wrathful means that actually
stop super toxic, destructive, egoic, you know, obsession. Zrudra obsessions, my power,
my story, my truth, only me. There are such things. And that's also a very deep kindness.
That these masters like have to do. So that's overcoming extreme post postmodernism, or
sometimes it's called integral, which I know for a lot of Buddhists are like very triggered
by that word. And I'm sorry about that, that you're so triggered. But it's like being triggered,
you know, when I don't know, someone says something that's like not taught in a sutra
or tantra, and you get triggered. I mean, this is really such a fundamentalist approach
to Buddhism, that I'm just very sorry for actually, it's very sad. It's really sad to
me. Because it's so puritanical. And none of these great masters are like this. His
Holiness Dalai Lama has been going to these mind life conferences for 35 years learning
from the specialists of all different fields. And he humbly curiously listens to them talk.
And almost all the time, they never even there have no interest in what he says. They're
not there to learn about Buddhism for the most part. This is what participants say.
But His Holiness Dalai Lama keeps coming back. He's so fascinated to learn about all these
different ways human beings make sense. How they love, how they grieve, how they understand,
how they imagine. Why? Because he's a great bodhisattva. He wants to serve beings, play
as many games as you can, learn as many languages as you can. Gurumba Che did this in India.
He learned all the languages in India. That was like his time as a scholar in India. He
didn't just sit there in the charnel ground doing nothing. He did that too. He was in
samsara and out of samsara in the same time. In the box and out of the box. So this is
what kind of undoing this extreme habit to always only my box. My literalist fundamentalist
box. My rational hyper empirical box. My feelings only. My personal story. Listen to me in my
specific way box. My like bird's eye view, big system dynamic thinking, but never actually
be held accountable to a lineage, extreme box. Lineage Vajrayana Buddhism destroys all
these boxes so kindly. Why? Because it loves all the good healthy aspects of those boxes.
Pre-modern box, family, integrity, character, hardworking, true to your word, honest, thorough,
caring of the land, future intergenerational worldviews, caring about other non-human beings
around you, spirits and animals. This is all pre-modern awesome stuff that will, you know
what happened? Unhealthy extreme modernism destroyed all that. But what did the healthy
modern thing do? It gave us science. It gave us literacy, human rights, women's rights,
LGBTQ plus rights. It gave us, you know, weekends and, you know, social security. I mean, modernism
gave us world centric. We all won kumbaya, a single world vision of common humanity in
a global view to see the environment as a single system and not just little nodes of
weather. This is all modern approach. How amazing. The Buddha taught this as verify
the teachings for yourself. The Buddha, I mean, the great Turthans always put back treasures
when they took out a term on because they didn't want to disturb the natural balance
of the environment. They were like 100% like world centric. We're all in this together
way beyond world centric. They're talking about other galaxies. They're loving other
beings of other kinds. We've never even seen our thought of. They're so beyond world centric,
even global. Just our planet. That's it. They're interplanetary. They're like inter universe
cycles. Postmodernism, how do they, the Buddha loved context. He loved plurality of views,
multiculturalism, contextualization. He called it interdependence. That's his core Buddhist
teaching. Everything depends. Dependent origination. The 12 links that Lai talked about just over
these past two sessions. Interdependence, it depends. This is called context sensitivity.
There's no one fixed way. There's no one size fits all Buddhism. There's many Buddhisms.
And then the healthy post postmodern way, not extreme healthy. How do all these systems
of sense making and love making and playing and imagining and grieving, like how do they
all fit together in large coherent pattern holes. This is like what the nine yana system
is all about. This is just core bedrock Buddhism. It's essential Buddhism. And the Buddha took
all the healthy aspects of these ways of making sense. Healthy pre-modern, healthy modern,
healthy postmodern, healthy postmodern, post postmodern. And he even went beyond that how
he even included all this stuff. Those views are not ready to deal with yet at all. And
we know what it's called, called tantra. Pure body and pure speech. And he gave millions
of teachings of the tantras. How do these other beings function? What are these subtle
ways of interdependence? How do these extra cognitive capacities of the mind turn on and
you get all these cities and these extraordinarily expansive, boomy realizations where you can
see way back in the past, way far into the future of probability trees of likelihood
and like cosmic, karmic habits. And I mean, way out of the box thinking, way beyond rationalism,
way beyond pluralism, way beyond big mapping according to what humans know currently according
to our science. He went so far beyond science and included science. This is all the tantras.
We have not grown into this culturally yet, but Buddha taught this 2,600 years ago. And
that's just during this universe cycle. He's taught this so many times before. And the
because of all the past, present, and future, we'll keep teaching this Vajrayana teachings.
This is the best thing that ever happened on this planet. At the very least, it's one
thing that has gone way beyond anything we've conceived of yet, evolutionarily, in terms
of, definitely in terms of mainstream modern framing, including post-postmodernism or integral.
So these are the healthy ways. Dhrjum teresar nundra. This is like, pick a part of this
nundra. It pure, perfectly exemplifies this. Instantly, the space changes to be a giant
refuge tree with gurumba in the middle. All the Dharma teachings, all the Dharmapalas,
all the Dakinis, all the Arhats, all the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas of this whole fortunate eon.
Plus, your mom and your dad, your enemies, the strangers, every single. And this is actually
the actual lived experience that we're trying to be with right now. We're not trying to
paste it on our view, as if we're watching a movie. We're trying to viscerally, in an
embodied, totally interdependent way, be in the living mandala of gurumba in the refuge
tree with all this enlightened activity happening, with all our parents, and all the parents
of the three times, this like, totally in love with the Dharma, and they're just showering
down blessings on us. And we're trying to be in a state of mind, an openness of heart,
that viscerally is totally surrendered and 100% full on believing in this is the real
thing happening. That's called Vajrayana practice. That's so far beyond rationalization. It's
so far beyond postmodernism. It's so far beyond integral. And there's whole lineage systems
of doing this. And none of them break the internal ecologies of one another. You get
the dudrum pterosaur nundro, bam, and then you can instantly arise as the karmakagyu
nundro tree. Then the long to ningtik nundro tree, in their entire world systems with their
own patterns, and dimensions, and shapes, and sizes, and sounds, and mantras, and lineage
instructions. And they're these entire vast landscapes, these whole worlds of actual patterned
integrity, that utterly perfectly work, and they can flex and flow between one another
instantly. This is Vajrayana. This is like way, there's just like open the doors wide.
The Vajrayana view is so vast, and this has been taught so thoroughly, and this is what
we're doing here all the time. I mean, I love going and being around friends and having
a good meal together and talking. I love that, that pre-modern, healthy, pro-social connection
humanness. That's good. But Vajrayana does a lot more than that. And I love science,
and thoroughness, and logical acuity, and like really going through the rigor. Vajrayana
does a lot more than that. And I love the felt sense story making, and genre bending,
and mashing up of different songs, and movies, and things. And Vajrayana does so much more
than that, without becoming like a total wasteland fragmented mess either. But like actual, these
internested ecologies of practice, where you get these internested philosophical systems
and these internested practice modalities. It's called the Nanyanas. And there's all
these interactive ways we can help beings that we don't know anything about yet, and other
planets by communicating them with colored light. Vajrayana, this is core Vajrayana stuff.
That's a big difference between Vajrayana and Sutra. We can actually serve beings through
light. That's a standard bedrock. That's a like, that's an orthodox Vajrayana view.
So I hope this is a little bit of like a fresh, kind of like a little freshness in the room.
There's so much freshness to be had. Vajrayana is such a vivid view. I mean, this new year's
opening, and it's another cycle. But here, yeah, another quote, and then I'll finish
from this poison is medicine. Dzogsar cancerimbiche. 229. "I feel that in the future, a non-Tibetan
teacher's single most important quality will be their longing to introduce the Buddha Dharma
to every single sentient being on this planet." They just love the Buddha Dharma. Another
quote, this is really good one, and then I'll really, this is a good one. You'll like this
one, and then I'll stop. Oh, there's so many good quotes in this. An abhishekha empowerment
is the one occasion in life that is truly worth celebrating. That's a strong one. Alright,
but this is the one I think you're really like. And then I'll be done, sorry. Oh yeah,
page 173. "A crystal clear understanding of the view will provide you with an easily accessible
safe haven. No matter what expression changes in any way, no matter what has to adapt, the
crystal clear understanding of the view will provide you with an easily accessible safe
haven." It's still not the final quote. That's the last one, sorry. Okay, here it is. 229.
Sorry for the multimedia thing. It's just 21st century now. Now we get to juggle all
of that. Okay, here it is. Yeah, good. This is page 229, yeah. This is good. Alright,
and then this is a conclusion. Thank you. "A teacher's genuine concern for the Dharma
is often their most attractive quality. Experts can be impressive when it comes to presenting
facts, theories, and complicated philosophies. But the person who has the most effect is
the tireless volunteer who serves coffee after a Dharma talk and then goes out of her way
to introduce new people to the expert. Her palpable enthusiasm for and conviction in
the Dharma is infectious and most of us respond better to unvarnished, unselfish, heartfelt
enthusiasm than to endless lists and definitions. As we try to draw more people's attention
to the Dharma, please try to embody the kind of irresistible enthusiasm and concern that
others find so attractive. I feel that in the future, a non-Tibetan teacher's single
most important quality will be their longing to introduce the Buddha Dharma to every single
sentient being on this planet. I have met many practitioners over the years who embody
this quality, but they are rarely Buddhist teachers, authors, scholars, professors, or
Buddha Dharma-promoting yoga teachers. More often than not, it is the single working mother
of three whose longing to connect everyone she knows with the Buddha Dharma is so intense
that she willingly goes the extra mile to spread the word. This kind of enthusiasm does
more for Buddha Dharma than all the Buddhist professionals on the planet. The luxury of
anonymity and not having a Dharma title to live up to or the responsibilities to maintain
may also help. Enthusiastic volunteers have the ability to communicate one-to-one with
friends and loved ones without seeming overbearing or dogmatic. I always include them in my prayers
for the long life of the Dharma holders. We are all a part of this living lineage tradition,
but the only way we can love it with enthusiasm and not make it just be another empire
fundamentalist
religion, which the Buddha never taught, is to love it in a way that is not all filtered
to all these extreme views. It's not only the only way for everyone, but it's so lovely.
The Buddha Dharma is just so magical and lovely and scientific, rational, such a coherent
philosophical system. It's a really rewarding way of life. It's hard. The path is hard,
but choosing samsara and all the negative emotions and just kind of splattering them
around is so much harder. It's endless. But if we do a little bit of the hard work of
churning kind of the milk of our own kind of path, we will really get the butter or the
cream. We'll actually get the reward of freedom, of happiness, long lasting happiness for the
benefit of all beings. This is really possible. It's very actionable. It's super practical.
The higher we go into these teachings, the more we include on the path, the more elegant
the path becomes. We can include more in these distilled kind of compact, essential nuggets,
which are called pith instructions. If we let those pith instructions of these higher
tantras, of zogchen and the tantras, if we really let them resonate and change the fundamental
ways that we hold ourselves as being so stuck and so fixed and so removed from interdependence,
if we really let the power of the blessing of those pith instructions really change us,
soften us, challenge us, then we really can become enlightened in this life. All the teachings
say that, and this really is so possible. Our great masters are living examples of what
happens when you really mingle with the Dharma. So thank you. This is a little longer. Appreciate
it. Hope it's not too harsh and strong, but it's with love for myself too. These are all
hard habits to break, so may I break them in a very elegant, lovely way? Yes. Thank you.
Could I do a quick summary? Really quick? Yes. So I know there might be really concern,
like bringing up extreme views, that I'm like adding my own extreme views by mentioning
like non-Dharma kind of categories, like pre-modern, modern, post-modern, post-post-modern, and
that's a very legitimate concern. This concern is how the Buddha Dharma has stayed like a
living lineage for over 2,600 years. The great Kabjai Tinlinor Burmichhe, he said in his
book, recent book, the Ruby Rosary, he said to change a single line of the Dharma is worse
than intentionally murdering all of the sentient beings in the universe. So I think I can assure
you I'm really concerned about not having the Dharma get messed up. This is a genuine
concern of mine. So then where's all this coming from? We can really look at the sutras,
the Buddha's Theravada teachings, sutra of inexhaustible knowledge. This is where the
Buddha taught the four alliances. He said don't rely on the teacher, rely on the teaching.
Don't rely on the words, rely on the meaning. Don't rely on the provisional meaning, rely
on the definitive meaning. Don't rely on conceptual mind, rely on wisdom. If we really look at
this, he's showing us the view we need to take and how we refine it by giving up extreme
views the same sequence that we went through today. Don't rely on the teacher, the teaching,
that's like saying don't rely on the doctor, rely on the medicine. This is giving up literal
fundamentalism. Just believe the person. He said no. Look at what they said in terms of
the medicine. That's called science. Then he said don't just stay on the surface level
of science. Don't rely on the words, rely on the meaning. There's layers of science.
There's layers of nuance. Don't be fundamentalist about just the phrase or the word of the rational
one system. There's multiple systems. That's called healthy postmodernism. But don't rely
on the provisional meaning. Rely on the definitive, which means all the teachings go towards
absolute
truth are wisdom, the definitive teaching. So definitive teaching absolute is unchanging.
It is not a static, oppressive, relative, universalizing structure. That's unchanging
wisdom. But we can't just talk about this using conceptual mind. We can't rely on conceptual
mind, but actual wisdom awareness. Don't just stay above the teachings talking about the
big maps. Actually have to be in a state of rigpa. Have to be in post-conceptual, non-conceptual
wisdom awareness. And then engage all the suffering nightmares and dreams of sentient
beings. This is like going beyond post-postmodern. It actually has to be a lived experience, which
then includes the Tantras. And that's how you get the fullness of Dzogchen, the great
perfection to include all those that was outlined by the Buddha in the Sutras. This is all straight
up. Bedrock Buddhism. And the Sutras, the most exoteric. So it's important always to locate
where these teachings are coming from, and with specific examples. And this is really
so important, always vitally important to do this. So we're not losing track of what's
essence and mixing it up with what's kind of expression. Thank you.
[ Silence ]